# Golte

`golte` is a library for Go that allows you to render Svelte components in your http handlers, supporting SSR+hydration capabilities without requiring NodeJS.

## Features
- SSR + Hydration
- NodeJS not required in production
- Layouts as middleware (they can be nested)
- Custom error pages
- Works with Go stdlib, `gorilla/mux`, `chi`, `gin`, `echo`, or any router that allows access to the underlying `http.ResponseWriter` and `*http.Request`
- Can compile to single, self-contained executable

## How does it work?

1. Svelte source files are first compiled to client and server JavaScript code (requires NodeJS during development only).

2. The generated code is embedded using Go's `embed` package. A middleware is created from this which can then be registered in your router.

3. From there, functions like `golte.RenderPage` and `golte.AddLayout` can be called to render components.

4. After running `go build`, the end result is a single binary that houses a full web app, with complete support for SSR and hydration.

## Installing

### Prerequisites

Make sure [Go](https://go.dev) and [NodeJS](https://nodejs.org) are installed (NodeJS is only needed during development).

### Setting up project

Initialize go.mod and package.json if not done so already:
```sh
go mod init <projectname>
npm init
```

Set `{"type": "module"}` in `package.json`.

Install Golte:

```sh
go get github.com/nichady/golte@latest
npm install golte@latest
# Make sure that the Go module and npm package are the same version.
```

## Example

Suppose we have the following file structure:
```
web/
    page/
        home.svelte
        about.svelte
        contact.svelte
        login.svelte
        profile.svelte
    layout/
        main.svelte
    app.html
main.go
...(any other files)
```

We can run `npx golte` to generate a `build/` directory.
By default, Golte will use `web/app.html` as the template file and search for `.svelte` files inside the `web/` directory (this can be changed in the config file).

Each `.svelte` file will be able to be rendered inside Go code by name. The name of the components are path of the file relative to the source directory (`web/`), without the file extension.

For example:
-  `web/page/home.svelte` => `page/home`
-  `web/layout/main.svelte` => `layout/main`
-  etc...

Suppose we want to make a program with the following requirements:
1. Five routes: `/`, `/about`, `/contact`, `/login`, and `/profile`.
2. `/`, `/about`, and `/contact` will have a layout; `/login`, and `/profile` will not.
3. `/profile` will have props passed to it, which can be accessed with "export let".

This is what `main.go` would look like, using `chi` as the router:

```go
package main

import (
	"net/http"

	"github.com/go-chi/chi/v5"
	"github.com/nichady/golte"

	"example/build" // this package will be generated by golte
)

func main() {
	r := chi.NewRouter()

	// register the main Golte middleware
	r.Use(build.Golte)

	r.Group(func(r chi.Router) {
		r.Use(golte.Layout("layout/main"))

		// these routes will have a layout
		r.Get("/", golte.Page("page/home"))
		r.Get("/about", golte.Page("page/about"))
		r.Get("/contact", golte.Page("page/contact"))
	})

	r.Get("/login", golte.Page("page/login"))

	// this route will have props passed to it
	r.Get("/profile", func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
		username := "john123"
		age := 22

		golte.RenderPage(w, r, "page/profile", map[string]any{
			"username": username,
			"age":      age,
		})
	})

	http.ListenAndServe(":8000", r)
}
```

For more comprehensive examples using other routers, passing props, and nesting layouts, see [_examples](_examples/).

For a list of all the possible functions, see the [package docs](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/nichady/golte).

## Configuration

The build process of `golte` can be configured to change things like the source or build directory.

Golte will recognize one of the following files in the root directory of your project:
```
golte.config.js
golte.config.mjs
golte.config.ts
golte.config.mts
```

Here is an example for `golte.config.ts`:
```typescript
import { Config } from "golte/config"

export default {
	template: "web/template.html",
	srcDir: "web/components/",
	outDir: "dist/",
} satisfies Config;
```

For all of the possible configuration options, see [`golte/config`](ts/public/config/index.ts).<br>
**Note: You must set `{"type": "module"}` in your `package.json` for config file to work.**

If you wish to use TypeScript or other preprocessors in your Svelte files, you can add a normal `svelte.config.js` file to your project root.

## JavaScript Exports 

The `golte` npm package provides some exports that you can use in your components:

### [`golte`](ts/public/index.ts)

```typescript
import { preload } from "golte";
```
```svelte
<a href="route1" use:preload>Route1</a>
<a href="route2" use:preload={"mount"}>Route2</a>
```

`preload` - a Svelte action that can be used in `<a>` tags. Using this turns the `<a>` into a Golte link, stopping the page from reloading when clicked.

### [`golte/stores`](ts/public/stores/index.ts)

```typescript
import { url } from "golte/stores";
```
```svelte
<p>The current url is {$url.href}</p>
```

`url` - a Svelte store that describes the current URL of the page

## Why?

I wanted a way to create web apps in Svelte while using Go as the backend language to create a single, self-contained binary. One option would be to embed a Svelte SPA into a Go binary. However, that solution lacks SSR capabilities and won't work when JavaScript is disabled.

I discovered [Bud](https://github.com/livebud/bud), but it forces you to structure your project in a specific way rather than treating your program as a normal Go app with a main() function and your own router. It also requires you to install their own cli. It also doesn't support layouts (I think).

There is also [Inertia.js](https://github.com/inertiajs/inertia), but it requires NodeJS for SSR, and I don't like how layouts need to specified inside the page components.

So, I created Golte to solve these problems.

## Related Projects

https://github.com/TimLai666/golte-cli - command-line tool for building and running Golte projects
